README.md, before:

# TIMSCONVERT

## About

TIMSCONVERT is a workflow designed for mass spectrometrists that allows for the conversion of raw data from Bruker 
timsTOF Pro, fleX, and SCP mass spectrometers (i.e. .d directory containing BAF, TDF, and TSF files) to open source 
data formats (i.e. mzML and imzML) that:
1. are compatible with downstream open source data analysis platorms.
2. incorporate trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) data into these open source formats.
3. possess manageable file sizes.
4. do not require any programming experience.

#### Examples for file conversion:

- LC-MS(/MS) (BAF) &#8594; mzML
- LC-TIMS-MS(/MS) (TDF) &#8594; mzML
- MALDI-MS(/MS) Dried Droplet (TSF) &#8594; mzML
- MALDI-MS Imaging Mass Spectrometry (TSF) &#8594; imzML
- MALDI-TIMS-MS(/MS) Dried Droplet (TDF) &#8594; mzML
- MALDI-TIMS-MS Imaging Mass Spectrometry (TDF) &#8594; imzML (does not incorporate ion mobility data)
<br>

#### Examples of data analysis platforms include and are not limited to:

- [Global Natural Products Social (GNPS)](https://gnps.ucsd.edu/)
- [Cardinal MSI](https://cardinalmsi.org/)

Please note that TIMSCONVERT is still actively under development and new changes are being pushed regularly. For the 
version of TIMSCONVERT found in our [bioRxiv preprint](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.12.09.472024v1), 
please see the [v1.0.0 branch here on Github](https://github.com/gtluu/timsconvert/tree/manuscript_v1.0.0).

## Dimensionality of timsTOF Data

Example of dimensionality of LC-TIMS-MS/MS data and a simplified corresponding mzML schema. Elements in the simplified 
mzML schema are color coded by the corresponding data in the chromatograms/spectra. At a given retention time in the 
chromatogram (indicated in pink), an MS1 spectrum may be visualized in the form of a three dimensional plot generated 
from m/z, intensity, and ion mobility arrays (indicated in orange). Precursor ions of interest found in MS1 spectra 
(indicated in purple) can be further analyzed by plotting m/z and intensity arrays for MS/MS spectra (indicated in 
teal). These spectral identifiers (i.e. retention time, precursor m/z, precursor 1/K0) may be used to locate the 
corresponding MS/MS spectrum from Bruker DataAnalysis or other data visualization software of choice.

![timsTOF Data mzML](imgs/dimensions.png)

## Installation and Usage

### GNPS Online Workflow (Coming Soon)

The web version of TIMSCONVERT currently only supports LC-TIMS-MS(/MS) data and can be found here. No installation is 
necessary. All that's required is a GNPS account.

1. Upload your data to GNPS ([instructions](https://ccms-ucsd.github.io/GNPSDocumentation/fileupload/)).
2. Go to the [TIMSCONVERT workflow page](https://proteomics2.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/index.jsp?params=%7b%22workflow%22%3A%20%22TIMSCONVERT%22%7d).
3. Select your dataset and parameters.
4. Submit your run.
5. You will receive an email when your job has completed.

### Setting Up Your Local Environment

If you prefer to run TIMSCONVERT locally via Nextflow or the CLI, you can set up an environment to do so. Please note
that TIMSCONVERT should be run under Linux or Windows. macOS is not supported.

#### Install Anaconda on Linux

1. Download and install Anaconda for [Linux](https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-2021.11-Linux-x86_64.sh). 
Follow the prompts to complete installation. Anaconda3-2021.11 for Linux is used as an example here.
```
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-2021.11-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash /path/to/Anaconda3-2021.11-Linux-x86_64.sh
```
2. Add ```anaconda3/bin``` to PATH.
```
export PATH=$PATH:/path/to/anaconda3/bin
```

#### Install Anaconda on Windows.

1. Download and install Anaconda for [Windows](https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-2021.11-Windows-x86_64.exe). 
Follow the prompts to complete installation.
2. Run ```Anaconda Prompt (R-MINI~1)``` as Administrator.

#### Set Up ```conda env```

3. Create a conda instance. You must be using Python 3.7. Newer versions of Python are not guaranteed to be compatible 
with Bruker's API in Linux.
```
conda create -n timsconvert python=3.7
```
4. Activate conda environment.
```
conda activate timsconvert
```
5. (Optional, for Nextflow workflow only) Install Nextflow.
```
conda install -c bioconda nextflow
```

#### Install TIMSCONVERT

6. Download TIMSCONVERT by cloning the Github repo (you will need to have [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads) and 
ensure that the option to enable symbolic links was checked during installation). It may be necessary to explicitly
allow for the use of symbolic links using by adding the ```-c core.symlinks=true``` parameter on Windows.
```
git clone https://www.github.com/gtluu/timsconvert
or
git clone -c core.symlinks=true https://www.github.com/gtluu/timsconvert
```
7. Install dependencies.
```
# TIMSCONVERT dependencies
pip install -r /path/to/timsconvert/requirements.txt

# TIMSCONVERT server/client dependencies
pip install -r /path/to/timsconvert/requirements_server.txt
```
8. You will also need to install our forked version of pyimzML, which has added support for ion mobility arrays in imzML
 data from imaging mass spectrometry experiments.
```
pip install git+https://github.com/gtluu/pyimzML
```

### Nextflow Workflow

A Nextflow workflow has been provided to run TIMSCONVERT.

1. Run the ```nextflow.nf``` script provided in this repo and specify your input directory and experiment type. Unless 
specified, all other default parameters for all other values will be used. See below for an explanation of all 
parameters.
```
nextflow run /path/to/timsconvert/nextflow.nf --input /path/to/your/data
```
2. Depending on the size of your data/number of files, TIMSCONVERT may take some time to finish conversion.


### Command Line Interface

The CLI version of TIMSCONVERT supports conversion of all experimental data types specified above.

1. Use ```bin/run.py``` to run TIMSCONVERT. The input directory and experiment type. Unless specified, all other 
default parameters for all other values will be used. See below for an explanation of all parameters.
```
python /path/to/timsconvert/bin/run.py --input /path/to/data
or
python3 /path/to/timsconvert/bin/run.py --input /path/to/data
```
2. Depending on the size of your data/number of files, TIMSCONVERT may take some time to finish conversion.

### Docker

A Dockerfile has also been provided to run TIMSCONVERT inside a Docker container.

1. Build the Docker image.
```
docker build --tag timsconvert -f Dockerfile.timsconvert .
```
2. Run the Docker image in a container.
```
docker run --rm -it -v /path/to/data:/data timsconvert --input /data --outdir /data
```

### GNPS API (Coming Soon)

We have developed an API to programmatically submit TIMSCONVERT jobs to GNPS.

1. Submit a job to GNPS. Enter any TIMSCONVERT parameters you wish to change. Otherwise, the default parameters will 
be used. A job ID will be returned.
```
python /path/to/timsconvert/bin/submit_timsconvert_job.py --input /path/to/data
or
python3 /path/to/timsconvert/bin/submit_timsconvert_job.py --input /path/to/data

>>> Job ID: <job_id>
```
2. Check the status of your job.
```
python /path/to/timsconvert/bin/check_timsconvert_job_status.py -u <job_id>
or
python3 /path/to/timsconvert/bin/check_timsconvert_job_status.py -u <job_id>

>>> <job_id> Job Status: PENDING
>>> <job_id> Job Status: RUNNING
>>> <job_id> Job Status: DONE
```
3. Once your job is complete, download your data. Data is downloaded as a tar file.
```
python /path/to/timsconvert/bin/download_timsconvert_job.py -u <job_id> -o /path/to/download/directory
or
python3 /path/to/timsconvert/bin/download_timsconvert_job.py -u <job_id> -o /path/to/download/directory
```

## Parameters

```
Required Parameters
--input                   Bruker .d file containing TSF/TDF or directory containing multiple Bruker .d files.

Optional Parameters
--outdir                  Path to folder in which to write output file(s). Defaults to .d source folder.
--outfile                 User defined filename for output if converting a single file. If input is a folder
                          with msdultiple .d files, this parameter should not be used as it results in each file
                          overwriting the previous due to having the same filename.
--mode                    Choose whether to export spectra in "raw" or "centroid" formats. Deafults to
                          "centroid".
--compression             Choose between ZLIB compression ("zlib") or no compression ("none"). Defaults to "zlib".

TIMSCONVERT Optional Parameters
--ms2_only                Boolean flag that specifies only MS2 spectra should be converted.
--exclude_mobility        Boolean flag used to exclude trapped ion mobility spectrometry data from exported data. 
                          Precursor ion mobility information is still exported. Recommended when exporting in profile 
                          mode due to file size.
--encoding                Choose encoding for binary arrays. 32-bit ("32") or 64-bit ("64"). Defaults to 64-bit.
--maldi_output_file       For MALDI dried droplet data, whether individual scans should be placed in
                          individual files ("individual") or all into a single file ("combined").
                          Defaults to combined.
--maldi_plate_map         Plate map to be used for parsing spots if --maldi_output_file == "individual".
                          Should be a .csv file with no header/index.
--imzml_mode              Whether imzML files should be written in "processed" or "continuous" mode. Defaults
                          to "processed".

TIMSCONVERT System Parameters
--lcms_backend            Choose whether to use "timsconvert" or "tdf2mzml" backend for LC-TIMS-MS/MS data conversion.
--chunk_size              Relative size of chunks of spectral data that are parsed and subsequently written at
                          once. 
--verbose                 Boolean flag to determine whether to print logging output.

tdf2mzml Optional Parameters
--start_frame             Start frame.
--end_frame               End frame.
--precision               Precision.
--ms1_threshold           Intensity threshold for MS1 data.
--ms2_threshold           Intensity threshold for MS2 data.
--ms2_nlargest            N Largest MS2.
```

## Testing

Get test data
```
cd test/data
sh ./get_data.sh
```

Run workflow
```
sh ./run_validation.sh
```

## Changelog
v 1.0.0
- Initial release.
- Compatibility for ESI and MALDI based experiments.

Commit message:

use forked version of tdf2mzml

README.md, after:

# TIMSCONVERT

## About

TIMSCONVERT is a workflow designed for mass spectrometrists that allows for the conversion of raw data from Bruker 
timsTOF Pro, fleX, and SCP mass spectrometers (i.e. .d directory containing BAF, TDF, and TSF files) to open source 
data formats (i.e. mzML and imzML) that:
1. are compatible with downstream open source data analysis platorms.
2. incorporate trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) data into these open source formats.
3. possess manageable file sizes.
4. do not require any programming experience.

#### Examples for file conversion:

- LC-MS(/MS) (BAF) &#8594; mzML
- LC-TIMS-MS(/MS) (TDF) &#8594; mzML
- MALDI-MS(/MS) Dried Droplet (TSF) &#8594; mzML
- MALDI-MS Imaging Mass Spectrometry (TSF) &#8594; imzML
- MALDI-TIMS-MS(/MS) Dried Droplet (TDF) &#8594; mzML
- MALDI-TIMS-MS Imaging Mass Spectrometry (TDF) &#8594; imzML (does not incorporate ion mobility data)
<br>

#### Examples of data analysis platforms include and are not limited to:

- [Global Natural Products Social (GNPS)](https://gnps.ucsd.edu/)
- [Cardinal MSI](https://cardinalmsi.org/)

Please note that TIMSCONVERT is still actively under development and new changes are being pushed regularly. For the 
version of TIMSCONVERT found in our [bioRxiv preprint](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.12.09.472024v1), 
please see the [v1.0.0 branch here on Github](https://github.com/gtluu/timsconvert/tree/manuscript_v1.0.0).

## Dimensionality of timsTOF Data

Example of dimensionality of LC-TIMS-MS/MS data and a simplified corresponding mzML schema. Elements in the simplified 
mzML schema are color coded by the corresponding data in the chromatograms/spectra. At a given retention time in the 
chromatogram (indicated in pink), an MS1 spectrum may be visualized in the form of a three dimensional plot generated 
from m/z, intensity, and ion mobility arrays (indicated in orange). Precursor ions of interest found in MS1 spectra 
(indicated in purple) can be further analyzed by plotting m/z and intensity arrays for MS/MS spectra (indicated in 
teal). These spectral identifiers (i.e. retention time, precursor m/z, precursor 1/K0) may be used to locate the 
corresponding MS/MS spectrum from Bruker DataAnalysis or other data visualization software of choice.

![timsTOF Data mzML](imgs/dimensions.png)

## Installation and Usage

### GNPS Online Workflow (Coming Soon)

The web version of TIMSCONVERT currently only supports LC-TIMS-MS(/MS) data and can be found here. No installation is 
necessary. All that's required is a GNPS account.

1. Upload your data to GNPS ([instructions](https://ccms-ucsd.github.io/GNPSDocumentation/fileupload/)).
2. Go to the [TIMSCONVERT workflow page](https://proteomics2.ucsd.edu/ProteoSAFe/index.jsp?params=%7b%22workflow%22%3A%20%22TIMSCONVERT%22%7d).
3. Select your dataset and parameters.
4. Submit your run.
5. You will receive an email when your job has completed.

### Setting Up Your Local Environment

If you prefer to run TIMSCONVERT locally via Nextflow or the CLI, you can set up an environment to do so. Please note
that TIMSCONVERT should be run under Linux or Windows. macOS is not supported.

#### Install Anaconda on Linux

1. Download and install Anaconda for [Linux](https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-2021.11-Linux-x86_64.sh). 
Follow the prompts to complete installation. Anaconda3-2021.11 for Linux is used as an example here.
```
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-2021.11-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash /path/to/Anaconda3-2021.11-Linux-x86_64.sh
```
2. Add ```anaconda3/bin``` to PATH.
```
export PATH=$PATH:/path/to/anaconda3/bin
```

#### Install Anaconda on Windows.

1. Download and install Anaconda for [Windows](https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-2021.11-Windows-x86_64.exe). 
Follow the prompts to complete installation.
2. Run ```Anaconda Prompt (R-MINI~1)``` as Administrator.

#### Set Up ```conda env```

3. Create a conda instance. You must be using Python 3.7. Newer versions of Python are not guaranteed to be compatible 
with Bruker's API in Linux.
```
conda create -n timsconvert python=3.7
```
4. Activate conda environment.
```
conda activate timsconvert
```
5. (Optional, for Nextflow workflow only) Install Nextflow.
```
conda install -c bioconda nextflow
```

#### Install TIMSCONVERT

6. Download TIMSCONVERT by cloning the Github repo (you will need to have [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads) and 
ensure that the option to enable symbolic links was checked during installation). It may be necessary to explicitly
allow for the use of symbolic links using by adding the ```-c core.symlinks=true``` parameter on Windows.
```
git clone https://www.github.com/gtluu/timsconvert
or
git clone -c core.symlinks=true https://www.github.com/gtluu/timsconvert
```
7. Install dependencies.
```
# TIMSCONVERT dependencies
pip install -r /path/to/timsconvert/requirements.txt

# TIMSCONVERT server/client dependencies
pip install -r /path/to/timsconvert/requirements_server.txt
```
8. You will also need to install our forked versions of pyimzML, which has added support for ion mobility arrays in 
imzML data from imaging mass spectrometry experiments, and tdf2mzml.
```
pip install git+https://github.com/gtluu/pyimzML
pip install git+https://github.com/gtluu/tdf2mzml
```

### Nextflow Workflow

A Nextflow workflow has been provided to run TIMSCONVERT.

1. Run the ```nextflow.nf``` script provided in this repo and specify your input directory and experiment type. Unless 
specified, all other default parameters for all other values will be used. See below for an explanation of all 
parameters.
```
nextflow run /path/to/timsconvert/nextflow.nf --input /path/to/your/data
```
2. Depending on the size of your data/number of files, TIMSCONVERT may take some time to finish conversion.


### Command Line Interface

The CLI version of TIMSCONVERT supports conversion of all experimental data types specified above.

1. Use ```bin/run.py``` to run TIMSCONVERT. The input directory and experiment type. Unless specified, all other 
default parameters for all other values will be used. See below for an explanation of all parameters.
```
python /path/to/timsconvert/bin/run.py --input /path/to/data
or
python3 /path/to/timsconvert/bin/run.py --input /path/to/data
```
2. Depending on the size of your data/number of files, TIMSCONVERT may take some time to finish conversion.

### Docker

A Dockerfile has also been provided to run TIMSCONVERT inside a Docker container.

1. Build the Docker image.
```
docker build --tag timsconvert -f Dockerfile.timsconvert .
```
2. Run the Docker image in a container.
```
docker run --rm -it -v /path/to/data:/data timsconvert --input /data --outdir /data
```

### GNPS API (Coming Soon)

We have developed an API to programmatically submit TIMSCONVERT jobs to GNPS.

1. Submit a job to GNPS. Enter any TIMSCONVERT parameters you wish to change. Otherwise, the default parameters will 
be used. A job ID will be returned.
```
python /path/to/timsconvert/bin/submit_timsconvert_job.py --input /path/to/data
or
python3 /path/to/timsconvert/bin/submit_timsconvert_job.py --input /path/to/data

>>> Job ID: <job_id>
```
2. Check the status of your job.
```
python /path/to/timsconvert/bin/check_timsconvert_job_status.py -u <job_id>
or
python3 /path/to/timsconvert/bin/check_timsconvert_job_status.py -u <job_id>

>>> <job_id> Job Status: PENDING
>>> <job_id> Job Status: RUNNING
>>> <job_id> Job Status: DONE
```
3. Once your job is complete, download your data. Data is downloaded as a tar file.
```
python /path/to/timsconvert/bin/download_timsconvert_job.py -u <job_id> -o /path/to/download/directory
or
python3 /path/to/timsconvert/bin/download_timsconvert_job.py -u <job_id> -o /path/to/download/directory
```

## Parameters

```
Required Parameters
--input                   Bruker .d file containing TSF/TDF or directory containing multiple Bruker .d files.

Optional Parameters
--outdir                  Path to folder in which to write output file(s). Defaults to .d source folder.
--outfile                 User defined filename for output if converting a single file. If input is a folder
                          with msdultiple .d files, this parameter should not be used as it results in each file
                          overwriting the previous due to having the same filename.
--mode                    Choose whether to export spectra in "raw" or "centroid" formats. Deafults to
                          "centroid".
--compression             Choose between ZLIB compression ("zlib") or no compression ("none"). Defaults to "zlib".

TIMSCONVERT Optional Parameters
--ms2_only                Boolean flag that specifies only MS2 spectra should be converted.
--exclude_mobility        Boolean flag used to exclude trapped ion mobility spectrometry data from exported data. 
                          Precursor ion mobility information is still exported. Recommended when exporting in profile 
                          mode due to file size.
--encoding                Choose encoding for binary arrays. 32-bit ("32") or 64-bit ("64"). Defaults to 64-bit.
--maldi_output_file       For MALDI dried droplet data, whether individual scans should be placed in
                          individual files ("individual") or all into a single file ("combined").
                          Defaults to combined.
--maldi_plate_map         Plate map to be used for parsing spots if --maldi_output_file == "individual".
                          Should be a .csv file with no header/index.
--imzml_mode              Whether imzML files should be written in "processed" or "continuous" mode. Defaults
                          to "processed".

TIMSCONVERT System Parameters
--lcms_backend            Choose whether to use "timsconvert" or "tdf2mzml" backend for LC-TIMS-MS/MS data conversion.
--chunk_size              Relative size of chunks of spectral data that are parsed and subsequently written at
                          once. 
--verbose                 Boolean flag to determine whether to print logging output.

tdf2mzml Optional Parameters
--start_frame             Start frame.
--end_frame               End frame.
--precision               Precision.
--ms1_threshold           Intensity threshold for MS1 data.
--ms2_threshold           Intensity threshold for MS2 data.
--ms2_nlargest            N Largest MS2.
```

## Testing

Get test data
```
cd test/data
sh ./get_data.sh
```

Run workflow
```
sh ./run_validation.sh
```

## Changelog
v 1.0.0
- Initial release.
- Compatibility for ESI and MALDI based experiments.
